# TypeScript Types Generation

> ⚠️ **FEATURE NOT READY**: This feature is partially ready!

sqlx-ts provides the powerful Typescript type generation based on the raw SQLs that you write in your code.
The feature greatly enhances type safety of the raw SQL queries, ultimately replaces the need of ORM completely.

Without type generation, you would maintain type definition of each raw SQL manually, which is a brittle process and
becomes an extra management in large projects.

## Getting started

The simplest way to use type generation feature of sqlx-ts is by setting `-g` or `--generate-types` flag when running sqlx-ts CLI.


```bash
$ cargo run ./samples/type-generator-test --generate-types --config=<path to .sqlxrc.json>
```

By default, sqlx-ts will generate type

[Please read more about .sqlxrc.json here](./2.1.configs-file-based.md)

## What's possible

sqlx-ts supports following type generations and other SQL syntax will be ignored from type generation

- SELECT statements
- INSERT statements
- UPDATE statements
- DELETE statements

Also type generation supports parameterised query as per the requirements of PREPARE statements of the databases
that sqlx-ts currently supports.
- [MySQL PREPARE](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/prepare.html)
- [Postgres PREPARE](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-prepare.html)

| Database | Parameterised Query | Example                                               |
|----------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| MySQL    | ?                   | SELECT * FROM items WHERE points > ? AND points < ?   |
| Postgres | $1 $2 $3            | SELECT * FROM items WHERE points > $1 AND points < $2 |

in your codebase, if you have the following SQL query

```typescript
const simpleQuery = sql`
SELECT *
FROM items
WHERE points > ?
AND points < ?
`
```

by running sqlx-ts type generation against the query, it would generate

```typescript
export type ISimpleQueryParams = [number, number]

export interface ISimpleQueryResult {
    id: string
    points: number
}

export interface ISimpleQueryQuery{
    params: ISimpleQueryParams;
    result: ISimpleQueryResult;
}
```

sqlx-ts will pick up name of the variable and use it when generating the type definitions. You can override 
the type name by setting the `@name` annotation, you can read more in the section [below](#annotations).

## Configuration

You can configure type generation in `.sqlxrc.json`; available configurations:

**Todo**
We need configurations for following:
- generate type paths
- file names (by default, it should be file_name.types.ts)

## Q/A

##### Why doesn't SQLx support named parameterised queries? `e.g. SELECT * FROM items WHERE point = :point`

We believe that there is no official way in Typescript to ensure the value level type-safety yet and providing named parameter does not guarantee
the true type safetiness that we are trying to achieve. Furthermore, name parameter is not the syntax supported by native database drivers, but 
they are an additional syntax supported by popular ORM libraries such as Sequelize.

The closest type safety that exists in TypeScript world is by emulating Opaque type e.g. https://github.com/sindresorhus/type-fest/blob/main/source/opaque.d.ts.
In the future, sqlx-ts will support Opaque type overrides natively to solve this matter.

